**Verifiable Claims** **for Postal Addresses: A Use Case for
Decentralized Postal Services using DIDs, VCs and Blockchains**

By Moses MA, FutureLab Consulting

Submitted to the 10th Rebooting the Web of Trust Technical Workshop •
March 16-20, 2020 • Buenos Aires

***Keywords:*** decentralization, postal services, verified claims,
identity, blockchain, decentralized, self-sovereign

**PROPOSAL**

We propose to facilitate the collaborative drafting of a technical paper
that describes the principles and key design considerations for
verifiable “physical address” claims. The global postal network now
seeks to understand the “decentralization revolution” and help to
develop game-changing, blockchain-powered new business models for the
world. We believe that, in turn, the active endorsement, support and
participation of the global postal industry could provide a tipping
point for adoption of DIDs and VCs. This is a first step toward that
desired future.

We base much of our work on key design considerations for decentralized
identity, claims and reputation, developed by C. Allen, M. Sporny, D.
Reed, and many others (see references), at previous RWOT design
conferences.

**BACKGROUND**

The Universal Postal Union (UPU) was established in 1874, and is the
second oldest international organization worldwide. With its 192 member
countries, the UPU is the primary forum for cooperation between postal
sector players, and sets the rules for international mail exchanges and
makes recommendations to stimulate growth in mail, parcel and financial
services volumes and improve quality of service for customers. As the
UPU’s mission is to ensure a truly universal network of up-to-date
products and services, the organization is now prepared to research and
understand how blockchains and decentralization will impact the future
of the Posts.

The UPU has developed a number of applicable international standards:

First, S42 defines a set of postal address components used in worldwide
addresses, and manages formal descriptions and rules of address
formatting for multiple language support, which can be easily
incorporated into computer systems for managing addresses. It is
published to coincide with publishing with ISO19160-4.

Second, S68 is a framework for the management of postal identity and
trust, which is designed to enable postal users to more easily and
securely make online transactions and access e-services. The framework
includes core elements that define a basic trust framework for the
creation, use and management of postal IDs and electronic credentials.
This spans registration and enrollment procedures, identity proofing
requirements, authentication methods, credential management, privacy and security requirements.

Third, EAD – Electronic Advance Declarations – is a proposal from the
UPU to support sending goods consignments abroad. Information about the
sender, recipient, content and consignment would thus be entered
electronically and sent to the country of destination in advance of
shipping. This is a standard that will be deployed globally within a
year. Harmonization of the corresponding address labels allows the consignments to be sorted automatically and
faster. The label also helps tracking events to be recorded and ensures
higher-quality track and trace.

Finally, the UPU Electronic Postal Services Programme manages .POST, a
sponsored top-level domain providing secure and trusted electronic
infrastructure on the Internet to serve the needs of the global postal
community in cyberspace. This top level directory .POST immediately
identifies legitimate postal operators and their services.

I am attempting to facilitate a partnership between the UPU and members
of the Decentralized ID movement. The goal is to implement a rapid entry
for postal authorities into blockchain enabled decentralized identity
efforts. This is mean to both strengthen postal industry efforts, such
as the aforementioned standards, to address the emerging web of trust,
as well as strengthen emerging decentralized standards and efforts such
as Decentralized Identity, Verifiable Claims, identity.foundation, and
others.

**APPLICATION TO POSTAL SERVICES**

Self-sovereign identity adheres to a series of guiding principles —
which are meant to ensure the user controls their identity related data.
Identity data is a double-edged sword — usable for both positive and
negative purposes. Thus, an identity system must balance transparency,
fairness, and support of the commons with protection for the individual.
DIDs provide a way for individuals and organizations to create
permanent, globally unique, verifiable identifiers that are entirely
under the identity owner’s control. Unlike a domain name, IP address, or
phone number, a DID is not rented from any service provider, and no one
can take it away from whomever owns or controls the associated private
key. DIDs are the first globally unique verifiable identifiers that
require no registration authority.

And so, some of the next step/deliverables we hope to develop during the
workshop include:

1.  Develop an understanding for how DIDs and verifiable claims would
    interoperate with postal services and information systems, such as
    addressing and consignment data

2.  Create a user persona for a typical postal services user to analyze
    tacit needs

3.  Develop a detailed use case for a “postal address” verifiable claim

4.  Develop knowledge about the use of DID within a reference
    application for financial inclusion

5.  Develop a pilot development plan (PDP) for the UPU: a strategy
    document setting out the pilot implementation of technical
    cooperation activities

6.  Open discussion on other issues related to this effort

**WHY THIS MATTERS**

Imagine a world where decentralized technology has been deployed and
globally adopted. Let us paint a picture for how this might be achieved.
Imagine that this approach becomes part of a decentralized identity
solution, driven by a robust and active developer community. The systems
and functional resources produced would be integrated into postal
services that are used in e-commerce, social interaction, low cost
banking, healthcare, and so on.

This could mean that the Posts will participate in the beginning of new
era for society built on an interconnecting web of trust. This will
enable a Cambrian explosion of decentralized postal services that will
empower e-commerce, financial services, logistics and shipping, and many
other areas. It also could provide insight into how we might someday
implement mitigation strategies for phishing and spam.

These benefits are possible with the adoption of decentralized trust
systems. Therefore, we seek to develop knowledge and expertise about the
integration of decentralization technologies to strengthen the
applications and offerings of postal organizations, including financial
inclusion; to explore and pilot cost effective explorations of such
advanced technologies to benefit the postal industry. These are the
goals for this working paper.

**About the Author:** Moses MA is associated with FutureLab
(www.futurelabconsulting.com).
